improved TCP keepalive documentation (#9610) (#10078)
solo-io/gloo: docs/content/guides/traffic_management/tcp_keepalive/_index.md

[Upstream]({{< versioned_link_path fromRoot="/reference/api/github.com/solo-io/gloo/projects/gloo/api/v1/upstream.proto.sk/" >}}) resource.

The following example enables TCP keepalive probes between the gateway proxy and the upstream connection. The first probe is sent when the connection has been idle for 60 seconds (`keepaliveTime`). After, a TCP keepalive probe is sent every 20 seconds (`keepaliveInterval`). After no response for 2 consecutive probes (`keepaliveProbes`), the connection is dropped.

```yaml
apiVersion: gloo.solo.io/v1
kind: Upstream
metadata: # collapsed for brevity
spec:
# the destination settings are omitted for brevity
  connectionConfig:
    tcpKeepalive:
      keepaliveInterval: 20 # seconds
      keepaliveProbes: 2 # number of probes
      keepaliveTime: 60 # seconds
```

## TCP keepalive on static clusters {#static-clusters}

{{% notice note %}}
{{< readfile file="static/content/enterprise_only_feature_disclaimer" markdown="true">}}
{{% /notice %}}

> For static upstream clusters that you set up through Helm templates, use the `gloo.gatewayProxies.NAME.tcpKeepaliveTimeSeconds`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you used the `gloo.gatewayProxies.NAME.envoyStaticClusters[].NAME` Helm value to set up a static upstream cluster, you can change the TCP keepalive timeout value (default is 60s) with the `gloo.gatewayProxies.NAME.tcpKeepaliveTimeSeconds` Helm setting. 
```

Reviewer: maybe something like I think it enough to capture what the static cluster is. we could potentially link to the envoy docs if that is something you think would be helpful

> setting to change the keepalive timeout value (default is 60s). For an overview of available Helm values, see the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For an overview of available Helm values, see the
```

[Enterprise Gloo Gateway]({{< versioned_link_path fromRoot="/reference/helm_chart_values/enterprise_helm_chart_values/" >}}) reference docs.

> Note that you cannot change the `tcp_keepalive_intvl` and `tcp_keepalive_probes` values. The default values are used instead. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that you cannot change the `tcp_keepalive_intvl` and `tcp_keepalive_probes` values. The default system values are used instead. 
```

---

> title: TCP Keepalive

Reviewer: should this be lower case? looks like we use lower case k afterwards

* On a slow or lossy network, if `tcp_keepalive_intvl` or `tcp_keepalive_probes` values are set too low, you might generate unnecessary traffic or inadvertently drop the connections more often than needed.
* If you set the probe intervals or keepalive time durations too high, you might not detect broken connections soon enough.
* Many application layer protocols like HTTP and gRPC (using HTTP/2) have their own keepalive mechanisms that can change what you otherwise expect from the TCP keepalive. For example, the application might still close the connection after the keep-alive timeout, even if TCP keepalive is in place. This unexpected closure happens because the TCP keep-alive probe does not get up to the application layer.  

### Use cases for TCP keepalive {#use-cases}

**Stale connections**

Because closing a TCP connection involves a four-way handshake, you might notice stale connections arise in an unstable network, where one side has been responding but the other side has not detected a response yet. Both sides might listen for events and consider the other nonresponsive, even though one side just missed the events.

> An example of this situation can occur between the Gloo Gateway control plane and the Envoy gateway proxy. Envoy might listen for xDS configuration updates but not receive any. Because Envoy thinks that the connection is still alive, it does not try to reconnect to the Gloo Gateway control plane. Even though Gloo Gateway has a default TCP keepalive set, you might find that you need to update the values. For an example, see [TCP keepalive on static clusters]({{<ref "#tcp-keepalive-on-static-clusters">}}).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An example of this situation can occur between the Gloo Gateway control plane and the Envoy gateway proxy. Envoy might listen for xDS configuration updates but not receive any. Because Envoy thinks that the connection is still alive, it does not try to reconnect to the Gloo Gateway control plane. Even though Gloo Gateway has a default TCP keepalive setting, you might find that you need to update the values. For an example, see [TCP keepalive on static clusters]({{<ref "#tcp-keepalive-on-static-clusters">}}).
```

If the client does not automatically retry, this might show up as an error. You might see many `RESET` messages in the TCP stats and think that you have a network issue. By enabling TCP keepalive or adjusting its settings, you can help keep long-lived connections open and functional. For an example, see [TCP keepalive on downstream connections]({{<ref "#tcp-keepalive-on-downstream-connections">}}).

## TCP keepalive on downstream connections {#downstream}

{{% notice warning %}}
Currently Envoy does not support turning on TCP keepalive settings directly on downstream connections. Instead, you can use the generic socket options settings. Socket options can have considerable effects on performance, and might not be portable across platforms. As such, the configuration example in this guide is

> not suitable for every production environment. Also note that because these options are applied to the Listener, they affect all downstream connections. Be careful and adjust the settings for your specific environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
not suitable for every production environment. Also note that because these options are applied to the gateway listener, they affect all downstream connections. Be careful and adjust the settings for your specific environment.
```

> not suitable for every production environment. Also note that because these options are applied to the Listener, they affect all downstream connections. Be careful and adjust the settings for your specific environment.

Reviewer: is there a line break between line 55 and 56?

{{% /notice %}}

Downstream connections are between the Envoy gateway proxy and the client that sends the request to your services. The client varies depending on your setup:

* The end user that sends a request.
* The Layer 4 or Layer 7 load balancer that forwards the request from the end user to the gateway proxy.

To enable TCP keepalive on downstream connections, configure the following settings in the listener options
on the [Gateway]({{< versioned_link_path fromRoot="/reference/api/github.com/solo-io/gloo/projects/gateway/api/v1/gateway.proto.sk/" >}})
or [Proxy]({{< versioned_link_path fromRoot="/reference/api/github.com/solo-io/gloo/projects/gloo/api/v1/proxy.proto.sk/" >}})

> resources.

Reviewer: I think we are not making changes to the proxy directly anymore

> The following example enables TCP keep-alive probes between the client and the gateway proxy. The first probe is sent when the connection has been idle for 60 seconds (`TCP_KEEPIDLE`). After, each probe is sent every 20 seconds (`TCP_KEEPINTVL`). After no response for 2 consecutive probes (`TCP_KEEPCNT`), the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example enables TCP keepalive probes between the client and the gateway proxy. The first probe is sent when the connection has been idle for 60 seconds (`TCP_KEEPIDLE`). After, each probe is sent every 20 seconds (`TCP_KEEPINTVL`). After no response for 2 consecutive probes (`TCP_KEEPCNT`), the
```

      - description: "keep-alive interval" # TCP protocol
        level: 6 # IPPROTO_TCP
        name: 5 # the TCP_KEEPINTVL parameter - The time in seconds between individual keep-alive probes.
        intValue: 20 # seconds
        state: STATE_PREBIND
      - description: "keep-alive probes count" # TCP protocol
        level: 6 # IPPROTO_TCP
        name: 6 # the TCP_KEEPCNT parameter - The maximum number of keep-alive probes that TCP sends before dropping the connection.
        intValue: 2 # number of failed probes
        state: STATE_PREBIND
```

## TCP keepalive on upstream connections {#upstream}

Upstream connections are between the Envoy gateway proxy and your services, such as Gloo upstreams, Kuberentes services, external services, OTel collectors, TAP servers, cloud functions, or other destinations.

To enable TCP keepalive on upstream connections, configure the following [ConnectionConfig]({{< versioned_link_path fromRoot="/reference/api/github.com/solo-io/gloo/projects/gloo/api/v1/connection.proto.sk/" >}}) settings in the
[Upstream]({{< versioned_link_path fromRoot="/reference/api/github.com/solo-io/gloo/projects/gloo/api/v1/upstream.proto.sk/" >}}) resource.

> The following example enables TCP keep-alive probes between the gateway proxy and the upstream connection. The first probe is sent when the connection has been idle for 60 seconds (`keepaliveTime`). After, a TCP keep-alive probe is sent every 20 seconds (`keepaliveInterval`). After no response for 2 consecutive probes (`keepaliveProbes`), the connection is dropped.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example enables TCP keep-alive probes between the gateway proxy and the upstream connection. The first probe is sent when the connection has been idle for 60 seconds (`keepaliveTime`). After, a TCP keepalive probe is sent every 20 seconds (`keepaliveInterval`). After no response for 2 consecutive probes (`keepaliveProbes`), the connection is dropped.
```

```yaml
apiVersion: gloo.solo.io/v1
kind: Upstream
metadata: # collapsed for brevity
spec:
# the destination settings are omitted for brevity
  connectionConfig:
    tcpKeepalive:
      keepaliveInterval: 20 # seconds
      keepaliveProbes: 2 # number of probes
      keepaliveTime: 60 # seconds
```

## TCP keepalive on static clusters {#static-clusters}

> {{% notice note %}}

Reviewer: I am not sure what static clusters are in this context

Reviewer 2: I am not sure if we talk much about static clusters as a concept in the docs, but I think this means when you pre-configure a "static" cluster of hosts for the Envoy gateway proxy, such as in the [Envoy docs](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/latest/start/quick-start/configuration-static#clusters) / [Envoy reference](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/latest/api-v3/config/cluster/v3/cluster.proto#config-cluster-v3-cluster). There is a field in the Helm chart where you can configures these in `gloo.gatewayProxies.NAME.envoyStaticClusters[].NAME`, and so if you want to change the tcp keepalive timeout for those static clusters, you'd use this new Helm field described here.

```yaml
static_resources:
  clusters:
    - name: static_cluster
      connect_timeout: 0.25s
      type: STATIC
      lb_policy: ROUND_ROBIN
      load_assignment:
        cluster_name: static_cluster
        endpoints:
          - lb_endpoints:
              - endpoint:
                  address:
                    socket_address:
                      address: 10.0.0.1
                      port_value: 8080
```

Author: Yes, that's what I am referring to. Thank you @artberger

{{< readfile file="static/content/enterprise_only_feature_disclaimer" markdown="true">}}
{{% /notice %}}

For static upstream clusters that you set up through Helm templates, use the `gloo.gatewayProxies.NAME.tcpKeepaliveTimeSeconds`

> setting to change the keep-alive timeout value (default is 60s). For Helm chart values, see the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
setting to change the keepalive timeout value (default is 60s). For an overview of available Helm values, see the
```

[Enterprise Gloo Gateway]({{< versioned_link_path fromRoot="/reference/helm_chart_values/enterprise_helm_chart_values/" >}}) reference docs.

> You cannot change the `tcp_keepalive_intvl` and `tcp_keepalive_probes` values. The default values are used instead. 

Reviewer: where would those be set? and I assume you cannot change them, because system defaults are automatically used?

Reviewer 2: I think the point is that of the three keepalive settings, if you want to customize the values for static clusters, only the timeout value is configurable, not these other two interval and probes that were discussed before in the About section.

- tcp_keepalive_probes
- tcp_keepalive_time

The explanation can be found in the [Linux tcp manpage](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man7/tcp.7.html).

Some considerations when determining the proper values for you environment:

1) On a slow or lossy network, if `tcp_keepalive_intvl` or `tcp_keepalive_probes` values are set too low, it can inadvertently
drop the connections more often then it should.
2) Many application layer protocols like HTTP, GRPC(using HTTP2/2) have their own keepalive mechanisms that change what you
expected from TCP keepalive. For example, the application can still close the connection after it's keep-alive timeout even
TCP keepalive is in place because TCP keepalive probe does not get up to the application layer.  

## Potential issues that can be mitigated by turning on TCP keepalive {#potential_issues}

### Stale Connections

Because tcp connection close is a 4-way handshake, it is possible to have stale connection where one side has been gone
but the other side is not aware when the network is unstable. If the unaware side is just listening for events, it might think
that there is just no event but in reality has been missing all the events.

> An example of this could happen between Gloo Gateway Control Plane but the Gateway Proxy (envoy). Envoy might be listening to

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
An example of this can occur between Gloo Gateway Control Plane and the Gateway Proxy (envoy). Envoy might be listening to
```

xds configuration update but never got any. Since envoy thinks the connection is still there, it never re-connect to the

> Control Plane. We have since enabled TCP keepalive between envoy and Gloo Gateway Control Plane but if that needs to be
> changed, see [TCP Keepalive on Static Clusters]({{<ref "#tcp-keepalive-on-static-clusters">}}) section below.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Control Plane. Out of the box there is a TCP keepalive  configured in Gloo gateway but you may find in your environment it needs to be to be changed, in order to change it, see [TCP Keepalive on Static Clusters]({{<ref "#tcp-keepalive-on-static-clusters">}}) section below.
```

### Network Load Balancer connection tracking

If the gateway proxy (envoy) is directly exposed to the public internet, the client would be the direct external end users.

> However, in a typical production setup, there is usually some form of load balancer between the end users and the gateway proxy.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In a many production setups, there can be some form of load balancer between the end users and the gateway proxy such as an [ALB](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/elasticloadbalancing/latest/application/introduction.html).
```

Some Network Load Balancers (NLB) use Connection Tracking to remember where a packet to get forwarded to once a connection is established.
If the connection has been idling, The NLB might remove the connection from it's  tracking table. In this scenario, both sides still think
the connection is open but when the client send a packet through the NLB, the NLB now would not know where to forward the packet and will
send a RESET to the client. If the client does not automatically retry, this might show up as an error or you will see a lot of RESET from
the tcp stats thinking it's a network issue. Enabling TCP keepalive will address this issue and help keep long-lived connection open and
functional. See [TCP Keepalive on Downstream Connections]({{<ref "#tcp-keepalive-on-downstream-connections">}}) section below.

## TCP Keepalive on Downstream Connections {#downstream}

> {{% notice note %}}
> Available in Gloo Gateway as of v1.7.0-beta11, v1.6.6 and v1.5.16.
> {{% /notice %}}

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```
we are so far out of n-4 so lets remove the notice

{{% notice warning %}}
Currently envoy does not directly support turning on TCP keepalive on downstream connections. It can only be done with generic socket options

> setting. Socket options can have considerable effects and may not be portable on all platforms. The configurations provided in this guide are
> not production proven, so please be careful! Because these options are applied to the Listener, they would affect all downstream connections

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
setting. Socket options can have considerable effects and may not be portable on all platforms. The configurations provided in this guide are
not suitable for every production environment, so please be careful! Because these options are applied to the Listener, they affect all downstream connections
```

---
title: TCP Keepalive
weight: 105
description: Enabling TCP Keepalive on Downstream and Upstream Connections
---

You can enable TCP keepalive on Downstream Connections or Upstream Connections. By default, TCP Keepalive is disabled.

> ## TCP Keepalive on Downstream Connections

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## TCP Keepalive on Downstream Connections {#downstream}
```

      - description: "idle time before first keep-alive probe is sent" # TCP protocol
        level: 6 # IPPROTO_TCP
        name: 4 # TCP_KEEPIDLE parameter - The time (in seconds) the connection needs to remain idle before TCP starts sending keepalive probes
        intValue: 60 # seconds
        state: STATE_PREBIND
      - description: "keep-alive interval" # TCP protocol
        level: 6 # IPPROTO_TCP
        name: 5 # the TCP_KEEPINTVL parameter - The time (in seconds) between individual keepalive probes.
        intValue: 20 # seconds
        state: STATE_PREBIND
      - description: "keep-alive probes count" # TCP protocol
        level: 6 # IPPROTO_TCP
        name: 6 # the TCP_KEEPCNT parameter - The maximum number of keepalive probes TCP should send before dropping the connection
        intValue: 2 # number of failed probes
        state: STATE_PREBIND
```

{{% notice warning %}}
Socket options can have considerable effects. The configurations provided in this guide are not production proven, so please be careful! These socket options only get applied when the listener starts up, so it would
not have effects without restarting the gateway.
{{% /notice %}}

> ## TCP Keepalive on Upstream Connections

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## TCP Keepalive on Upstream Connections {#upstream}
```
